We tend to think of environmental catastrophes -such as the recent Exxon Valdez oil-spill 
disaster in the Bay of Alaska-as "accidents": isolated phenomena that erupt without notice 
or warning. But when does the word accident become inappropriate? When are such 
occurrences inevitable rather than accidental? And when does a consistent pattern of 
inevitable disasters point to a deep-seated crisis that is not only environmental but 
profoundly social? 

President Bush was content to blame the spill of more than ten million gallons of crude 
petroleum off Valdez Harbor on negligence by a soused sea captain. In fact, however, it 
was the consequence of social circumstances far more compelling than the usual "human" 
or "technological" factors cited in mass-media reporting. Since the pipeline at Valdez 
Harbor went into service a dozen years ago, there have been no fewer than 400 oil spills 



in the Bay of Alaska. In 1987, the tanker Stuyvesant dumped almost a million gallons into 
the gulf after leaving Valdez, presumably because of mechanical failures attributed to 
severe weather. The environmental - protection organization Greenpeace recorded seven 
spills in Alaskan waters this year even before the Exxon Valdez ran aground. 

Oil spills ranging from a few thousand gallons to a million or more-as well as the oil 
routinely flushed out of tankers to make room for return-trip cargoes have polluted vast 
areas of the world's ocean surface and coastline. The appalling effects of oil spills that 
occurred many years ago are still apparent today, and new incidents keep adding to the 
damage. The widely publicized 10,000-gallon spill that "mysteriously polluted the coastal 
areas of two Hawaiian islands a week after the Exxon Valdez ran aground was more than 
matched by the little-publicized 1 17,000 gallons that the Exxon Houston dumped off 
another Hawaiian coastal area some three weeks before the Valdez spill. 

On a single day, June 23, 1989, three major spills— off Newport, Rhode Island, in the 
Delaware River, and on the Texas Gulf Coast-dumped a total of well over one million 
gallons of oil into U.S. waters 

Many find it difficult to see these incidents as part of a continuum that has a common 
source. To trace a chain of events from its cause to its consequence is an unfamiliar task 
for people who have been conditioned to see life as a television sit-com or talk show 
composed of discrete self-contained, anecdotal segments. We live, in effect, on a diet of 
short takes, devoid of logic or long-range effect. Our problems to the extent that we 
recognize them as problems at all-are episodic rather than systemic; the scene dissolves, 
the camera moves on. 

But the present crisis will not disappear with a switch of channels. It was predictablc-and 
predicted-decades ago. There is an ail-but- forgotten history of dire portents, urgent 
warnings, and unsuccessful efforts by an earlier generation of environmentalists to deal 
with the social factors that underpin environmental problems. In many instances, they 
predicted with uncanny accuracy the results of ecologically insane policies pursued by the 
corporate establishment in the West and the bureaucratic establishment in the East. 

The earliest disputes around the dangers posed by the oil industry's expansion into 
oceanic drilling occurred even before the Arctic regions were opened to oil exploitation. 
They go back well into the 1950s, when larger vessels started being used to transport 
Middle Eastern oil. Long before spills came to public attention, environmentalists were 
voicing fears over hazards posed by growing tanker capacity. 

No less serious than the possibility of "human error" in the operation of these huge 
vessels was the well-known fact that even the sturdiest ships have a way of being buffeted 
by storms, drifting off course, foundering on reefs in treacherous waters, and sinking. In 
lectures I gave decades ago on the Pacifica Radio network, I emphasized the sheer 
certainty of disastrous oil spills that would surely follow upon the growing size of 
tankers. The Exxon Valdez spill was, therefore, not an unforeseen accident but a dead 
ccrtainty-and one that may yet be beggared by others to come. It was as predictable as 
Three Mile Island and Chernobyl. 



No less predictable was the global wanning trend. Forecasts that carbon dioxide from the 
burning of fossil fuels could raise planetary temperatures go back to the Nineteenth 
Century and have been repeated from time to time since then, though more often as 
atmospheric curiosities than as serious ecological warnings. I wrote as early as 1964 that 
increases in the "blanket of carbon dioxide" from fossil-fuel combustion "will lead to 
more destructive storm patterns and eventually to melting of polar ice caps, rising sea 
levels, and the inundation of vast land areas." 

The possibility of acid rain and the systematic deforestation of the equatorial rain-forest 
belt, not to speak of the impact of chlorofluorocarbons on the Earth's ozone layer, could 
not have been foreseen in technical detail. But the larger issue of environmental 
destruction on a global scale and the disruptions of basic natural cycles was already on 
the radical agenda in the late 1960s, long before Earth Day was proclaimed and ecological 
issues were reduced to ridding city streets of cans, bottles, and garbage. 



Predictions of disaster come cheap when they are not derived from reasoned analysis of 
the sort that has become unpopular in this era of New Age mysticism. But we have no 
reason to rejoice in the fact that Margaret Thatcher often sounds like an environmentally 
oriented "Green" in her public warnings about the Greenhouse Effect, if we bear in mind 
that Thatcherism in Britain can often be equated with a transition to high-technology and 
nucleonics. 

Nor would it be particularly encouraging to learn that Mikhail Gorbachev is prepared to 
follow Thatcher in phasing out the older "rust-belt" industries and their fossil-fuel energy 
in the aftermath of Chernobyl and earlier, possibly worse nuclear "events" we haven't yet 
heard much about. If solutions to the Greenhouse Effect create potentially more 
disastrous problems like the proliferation of "clean," nuclear power and its long-lived 
radioactive debris, the world may be worse off as a result of this new kind of 
environmental thinking 

Attempts by President Bush to join this chorus by revising the Clean Air Act to reduce 
high ozone levels, cancer-causing pollutants, and other toxic substances have earned 
almost as much criticism as praise. The effects of Bush's proposals which are modest 
enough if we bear in mind the appalling magnitude of the enviro nmental casts-will not 
be fully felt until the first decade of the next century. Understandably, that has aroused the 
ire of environmentalists. Moreover, for Bush to leave the execution of his plan to industry 
is to guarantee that the costs of pollution-control technology will be passed on, with some 
extras, to the consumer and that many of the proposals will be honored in the breach. 

What environmentalists must emphasize is that the global ecological crisis is systemic not 
simply the product of random mishaps. If the Exxon Valdez disaster is treated merely as 
an "accident" as were Chernobyl and Three Mile Island-we will have deflected public 
attention from a social crisis of historic proportions: We do not simply live in a world of 



problems but in a highly problematical world, an inherently anti-ecological society. This 
anti-ecological world will not be healed by acts of statesmanship or passage of piecemeal 
legislation. It is a world that is direly in need of far-reaching structural change. 

Perhaps the most obvious of our systemic problems is uncontrollable growth. I use the 
word "uncontrollable" advisedly, in preference to "uncontrolled." The growth of which I 
speak is not humanity's colonization of the planet over millennia of history. It is rather an 
inexorable material reality that is unique to our era: namely, that unlimited economic 
growth is assumed to be evidence of human progress. We have taken this notion so much 
for granted over the past few generations that it is as immutably fixed in our 
consciousness as the sanctity of property itself. 

Growth is, in fact, almost synonymous with the market economy that prevails today. That 
fact finds its clearest expression in the marketplace maxim, "Grow or die." We live in a 
competitive world in which rivalry is a law of economic life; profit, a social as well as 
personal desideratum; limit or restraint, an archaism; and the commodity, a substitute for 
the traditional medium for establishing economic relationships-namely, the gift. 

It's not enough, however, to blame our environmental problems on the obsession with 
growth. A system of deeply entrenched structures-of which growth is merely a surface 
manifestation-makes up our society. These structures arc beyond moral control, much as 
the flow of adrenaline is beyond the control of a frightened creature This system has. in 
effect, the commanding quality of natural law. 

In a national or international market society {be it of the corporate kind found in the West 
or the bureaucratic kind found in the East), competition itself generates a need for growth. 
Growth is each enterprise's defense against the threat of absorption by a rival. Moral 
issues have no bearing on this compelling adversarial relationship. To the extent that a 
market economy becomes so pervasive that it turns society itself into a marketplace-a vast 
shopping mall-it dictates the moral parameters of-human life and makes growth 
synonymous with personal as well as social progress. One's personality, love life, income, 
or body of beliefs, no less than an enterprise, must grow or die. 

This market society seems to have obliterated from most people's memory another world 
that once placed limits on growth, stressed cooperation over competition, and valued the 
gift as a bond of human solidarity. In that remote world, the market was marginal to a 
domestic or "natural" society and trading communities existedmerely in the "interstices" 
of the premarket world, to use Marx's appropriate words. 

Today, a rather naive liberal language legitimates a condition we already take as much for 
granted as the air we breathe: "healthy" growth, "free" competition, and "rugged" 
individualism-euphemisms that every insecure society adopts to transform its more 
predatory attributes into virtues. "It's business, not personal. Sonny!" as the Godfather's 
consigliere says after the family patriarch has been pumped full of bullets by his Mafia 
rivals. Thus are all personal values reduced to entreprenerinal ones. 



It has been dawning on the First World, which is rapidly using up many of its resources, 
that growth is eating away the biosphere at a pace unprecedented in human history. 
Deforestation from acid rain, itself a product of fossil fuel combustion, is matched or 
even exceeded by the systematic burning that is cleaning vast rain forests. The destruction 
of the ozone layer, we are beginning to learn, is occurring almost everywhere, not just in 
Antarctica. 

We now sense that unlimited growth is literally recycling the complex organic products 
of natural evolution into the simple mineral constituents of the Earth at the dawn of life 
billions of years ago. Soil that was in the making for millennia is being tunned into sand; 
richly forested regions filled with complex life-forms are being reduced to barren 
moonscapes; rivers, lakes, and even vast oceanic regions are becoming noxious and lethal 
sewers, radio nuclides, together with an endless and ever-increasing array of toxicants, 
are invading the air we breathe, the water wc drink, and almost every food item on the 
dinner table. Not even sealed, air-conditioned, and sanitized offices arc immune to this 
poisonous deluge. 

Growth is only the most immediate cause of this pushing back of the evolutionary clock 
to a more primordial and mineralized world. And calling for "limits to growth" is merely 
the first step toward bringing the magnitude of our environmental problems under public 
purview. Unless growth is traced to its basic source-competition in a grow-or-die market 
society-the demand for controlling growth is meaningless as well as unattainable. We can 
no more arrest growth while leaving the market intact than we can arrest egoism while 
leaving rivalry intact. 

In this hidden world of cause-and-effect, the environmental movement and the public 
stand at a crossroads. Is growth a product of "consumerism" -the most socially acceptable 
and socially neutral explanation that we usually encounter in discussions of 
environmental deterioration? Or does growth occur because of the nature of production 
for a market economy? To a certain extent, we can say. both. But the overall reality of a 
market economy is that consumer demand for a new product rarely occurs spontaneously, 
nor is its consumption guided purely by personal considerations. 

Today, demand is created not by consumers but by producers-specifically, by enterprises 
called advertising agencies that use a host of techniques to manipulate public taste. 
Amencan washing and drying machines, for example, are all but constructed to be used 
communally-and they are communally used in many apartment buildings. Their 
privatization in homes, where they stand idle most of the time, is a result of advertising 
ingenuity. 

One can survey the entire landscape of typical "consumer" items and find many other 
examples of the irrational consumption of products by individuals and small 
families-"consumer" items that readily lend themselves to public use. 

Another popular explanation of the environmental crisis is population increase. This 



argument would be more compelling if it could be shown that countries with the largest 
rates of population increase are the largest consumers of energy, raw material, or even 
food. But such correlations are notoriously false. Often mere density of population is 
equated with overpopulation in a given country or region. Such arguments, commonly 
cynical in their use of graphics-scenes of congested New York City streets and subway 
stations during rush hours, for example-hardly deserve serious notice. 

We have yet to determine how many people the planet can sustain without complete 
ecological disruption. The data are far from conclusive, but they are surely highly biased- 
generally along economic, racial, and social lines. Demography is far from a science, out 
it is a notorious political weapon whose abuse has disastrously claimed the lives of 
millions over the course of the century. 

Finally, "industrial society," to use a genteel euphemism for capitalism, has also become 
an easy explanation for the environmental ills that afflict our time. But a blissful 
ignorance clouds the fact that several centuries ago, much of England's forest land, 
including Robin Hood's legendary haunts, was deforested by the crude axes of rural 
proletarians to produce charcoal for a technologically simple metallurgical economy and 
to clear land for profitable sheep runs. This occurred long before the Industrial 
Revolution. 

Technology may magnify a problem or even accelerate its effects. But with or without a 
"technological imagination" (to use Jacques Ellul's expression), rarely does it produce the 
problem itself. Indeed, the rationalization of work by means of assembly-line techniques 
goes back to such patently pre-industnal societies as the pyramid-builders of ancient 
Egypt, who developed a vast human machine to build temples and mausoleums. 



To take growth out of its proper social context is to distort and privatize the problem. It is 
inaccurate and unfair to coerce people into believing that they are personally responsible 
for present-day ecological dangers because they consume too much or proliferate too 

readily. 

This privatization of the environmental crisis, like New Age cults that focus on personal 
problems rather than on social dislocations, has reduced many environmental movements 
to utter ineffectiveness and threatens to diminish their credibility with the public. If 
"simple living" and militant recycling are the main solutions to the environmental casts, 
the crisis will certainly continue and intensify. 

Ironically, many ordinary people and their families cannot afford to live "simply." It is a 
demanding enterprise when one considers the costliness of "simple" hand-crafted artifacts 
and the exorbitant price of organic and "recycled" goods. Moreover, what the "production 
end" of the environmental crisis cannot sell to the "consumption end," it will certainly sell 
to the military. General Electric enjoys considerable eminence not only for its 
refrigerators but also for its Gatling guns. This shadowy side of the environmental 



problem-military production-can only be ignored by attaining an ecological airheadedness 
so vacuous as to defy description. 

Public concern for the environment cannot be addressed by placing the blame on growth 
without spelling out the causes of growth. Nor can an explanation be exhausted by citing 
"consumerism" while ignoring the sinister role played by rival producers in shaping 
public taste and guiding public purchasing power. Aside from the costs involved, most 
people quite rightly do not want to "live simply." They do not want to diminish their 
freedom to travel or their access to culture, or to scale down needs that often serve to 
enrich human personality and sensitivity. 

Rambunctious as certain "radical" environmentalist slogans like BACK TO THE 
PLEISTOCENE! (a slogan of the Earth First! group) may sound, they are no less 
degrading and depersonalizing than the technocratic Utopias issued by H.G. Wells early in 
this century. 

It will take a high degree of sensitivity and reflection-attributes that are fostered by the 
consumption of such items as books, art works, and music-to gain an understanding of 
what one ultimately needs and does not need to be a truly fulfilled person. Without such 
people in sufficient numbers to challenge the destruction of the planet, the environmental 
movement will be as superficial in the future as it is ineffectual today. 

The issue of growth, then, can be used either to deliver us over to banalities about our 
consumption patterns and technocratic passion for gadgetry (Buddhism, I note, has not 
rendered Japan less technocratic than the United States) or to guide public thinking to the 
basic issues that bring the social sources of the ecological crisis into clear focus. 

In Vermont, for example, Left Greens who are seeking to radicalize the state's rather tepid 
environmental movement have followed the logic of diminished growth along 
challenging and useful lines. In their demand for a year-long moratorium on growth and a 
public discussion of vital needs, they have made it possible to ask key questions about the 
problems raised by growth control. 

By what criteria are we to determine what constitutes needless growth, for example, and 
what is needful growth? Who will make this decision-state agencies, town meetings, 
alliances among towns on a countywide basis, neighborhoods in cities? 

To what extent should municipalities be empowered to limit growth? Should they begin 
to buy open land? Should they subsidize farmers to save farms for future generations? 
Should they bring major industrial and commercial concerns under the control of citizen 
assemblies? Should they establish legal criteria to determine ecologically sound 
restrictions on developers and venture-capital investors? 

This sequence of questions, each of which logically follows from the idea of controlling 
growth, can have impressive consequences. 

It has forced people in Vermont communities to think through the nature of their 



priorities: growth or a decent environment? Centralized or local power? Community 
alliances or bureaucratic agencies? The exploitative use of property that involves the 
public welfare or the communal control of such property? 

A number of Vermont towns have challenged the right of the state government in 
Montpelier to disregard the demands of citizens and town meetings to inhibit growth- 
indeed, to ignore their attempts to determine their own destiny. 

New Age environmentalism and conventional environmentalisrn that place limits on 
serious, in-depth ecological thinking have been increasingly replaced by social ecology 
that explores the economic and institutional factors that enter into the environmental 
crisis. 

In the context of this more mature discourse, the Valdez oil spill is no longer seen as an 
Alaskan matter, an "episode" in the geography of pollution. Rather it is recognized as a 
social act that raises such "accidents" to the level of systemic problems-rooted not in 
consumerism, technological advance, and population growth but in an irrational system of 
production, an abuse of technology by a grow-or-die economy, and the demographics of 
poverty and wealth. Ecological dislocation 
cannot be separated from social dislocations.